---
title: "Ectopic Pregnancy - Ultrasound Diagnosis"
source: "Callen’s Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology (Norton et al.)"
year: 2024
pages: "Ch 33, pp. 986-1020"
evidence_level: "2B"
tags: ['condition', 'ectopic-pregnancy', 'ultrasound', 'diagnostic']
---

CHAPTER 33 Ectopic Pregnancy RISK FACTORS The most common predisposing risk factor for EP is abnormal tubal anatomy, usually tubal scarring, which is most often secondary to salpingitis associated with pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) from sexually transmitted infections (Table 33-1). Salpingitis isthmica to diagnose, and some cases elude even the best diagnosticians. Optimal care requires balancing an early but possibly incorrect diagnosis and intervening with the progress of a normal IUP, particularly if it is a desired pregnancy, versus waiting too long to be certain and thus endangering a woman’s life from rupture of an EP. This chapter will review the role of sonography in the diagnosis and management of EP, including EPs in unusual locations. EPIDEMIOLOGY According to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the incidence of EP in the United States rose from 0.5% of all pregnancies in the 1970s to 2% in the 1990s.1,2 This rise has been linked to an increase in the number of patients with risk factors as well as an increase in the number of pregnancies resulting from ART. However, the reported increased incidence of EP is also almost certainly related to earlier presentation of many patients with EP as well as improved diagnostic techniques, including more sensitive assays for hCG and high-resolution TVS. As a result, some very early EPs are now diag- nosed that in years past might have spontaneously resolved without coming to medical attention. Fortunately, the mortality rate associated with EP has progressively decreased in recent years. The EP mortality ratio in the United States decreased from 1.15 deaths per 100,000 live births in 1980 to 1984 to 0.50 death per 100,000 live births in 2003 to 2007. Based on the current average annual rate of decline, the ratio is expected to further decrease to 0.36 death from EP per 100,000 live births by 2013 to 2017.3 None- theless, recent epidemiologic studies suggest that 6% of maternal deaths in the United States are caused by EPs,4 and EP remains the leading cause of pregnancy-related death during the first trimester. FIG 33-1 Locations of ectopic pregnancies. Ninety-five percent of ectopic pregnancies occur in the fallopian tube: in the interstitial (A), isthmic (B), ampullary (C, most common), and fimbrial (D) portions. Extratubal ectopic pregnancies may be found in ovarian (E), cervical (F), cesarean scar (G), myometrial scar (H), and abdominal (I) locations. TABLE 33-1 Risk Factors for Ectopic Pregnancy Major Risk Factors Tubal disease Pelvic inflammatory disease: salpingitis Previous ectopic pregnancy Salpingitis nodosa isthmica Tubal sterilization Reconstructive tubal surgery In utero exposure to dethystilbesterol (DES) Assisted reproductive technologies (ART) Intrauterine devices Minor Risk Factors Endometriosis Early age at first intercourse (<18 years) Older maternal age at first pregnancy (>35 years) Cigarette smoking Previous pelvic/abdominal surgery No known risk factors (50% of cases) SECTION II Gynecology the endometrium. The syncytiotrophoblast and cytotrophoblast of the EP invade into the muscularis layer of the fallopian tube and in essence create adherent trophoblastic tissue.15 As the trophoblastic tissue grows and the tube stretches, it becomes prone to rupture. Some tubal preg- nancies are expelled through the fimbriated end of the tube if the trophoblastic tissue is sheered from its attachment to the muscularis layer, resulting in a tubal abortion. Most of these do not survive, but rarely an abdominal pregnancy may result. If the EP implants outside the tube, then the syncytiotrophoblast and cytotrophoblast will invade underlying tissues and the placental tissue becomes extremely difficult to separate from these tissues, resulting in a substantial increased risk of hemorrhage. In general, it is helpful to consider two broad categories that give rise to ectopic implantation. The first includes conditions that interfere with transport of the fertilized ovum to the endometrial cavity. The second includes conditions that predispose to premature implantation of the fertilized ovum before reaching the endometrial cavity. The fal- lopian tube should not be viewed as a passive conduit, but rather is part of a complex interactive process involving tubal peristalsis, ciliary nodosa, which is characterized by nodular thickening of the isthmic portion of the fallopian tube accompanied by multiple diverticula, is found in more than 50% of surgically excised tubal EPs. The diverticula correlate well with the location of the EP implantations.5 Prior history of EP is also a major risk factor. The rate of recurrent EP is 5% to 20% after a single prior EP, but increases to greater than 30% in women with a history of two consecutive EPs.6 Other causes of tubal scarring include tubal sterilization, reconstructive tubal surgery, and tubal abnormalities related to diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure in utero. One study reported the risk of EP within 10 years after tubal steriliza- tion to be 7 per 1000 procedures.7 In addition, the incidence of EP is increased in women who have conceived using ART, especially following in vitro fertilization (IVF), even if the fallopian tubes are anatomically normal. Tubal pregnancies may result from inadvertent direct placement of embryos into a dis- eased tube during embryo transfer (ET). Retrograde migration of a transferred embryo from the uterine cavity into an abnormal tube may also occur.8 IVF patients are at increased risk of EP because of the high prevalence of tubal damage, the use of ovulation induction therapy, and multiple ETs, which put the patient at risk for heterotopic implan- tations. The presence of an intrauterine device (IUD) increases the risk for EP by a factor of 2.5. An estimated 25% to 50% of pregnancies conceived with an IUD in place are ectopic, and past IUD use may also pose a small increased risk for EP.9,10 In general, infertility seems to be a risk factor. There has been no documentation of a clear association between EP and oral contraceptive use, previous elective pregnancy termination, or spontaneous miscarriage. Other factors with less clear-cut associations have been implicated as risk factors for EP. Epidemiologic studies have shown that cigarette smoking at the time of conception is a risk factor for tubal EP. Possible explanations for this relationship include altered tubal contractility and abnormal ciliary motion from the effect of nicotine or reduced immunity in cigarette smokers, which may affect tubal response to inflammation, as in PID.11,12 Endometriosis is also associated with higher rates of EP and miscarriage, possibly because endometriosis and other adjacent inflammatory conditions, such as acute or ruptured appendicitis, can secondarily affect the fallopian tube, thereby causing scarring and adhesions. However, more recent studies claim that there is no association between endometriosis and EP.13 Abnormalities of the zygote and endocrine dysfunction that may affect ovum transport also increase the risk for EP. Age has also been implicated as a risk factor. Women who have their first sexual encounter when younger than 18 years of age or their first pregnancy when older than 35 years of age have a slightly increased risk of tubal pregnancy. Importantly, however, it should be recognized that approximately 50% of patients with EP have no known risk factors.9 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY Approximately 95% of EPs are located within the fallopian tube (Figs. 33-1 and 33-2): 70% in the ampullary portion of the tube, 12% in the isthmic portion, 11% in the fimbriated end, and 2% to 4% in the interstitial portion.14 Abnormal locations within the uterus include the cervix, a rudimentary horn, and myometrial scars, including scars following cesarean delivery or myomectomy. Other unusual types of EP include intraovarian, abdominal, retroperitoneal, and mediasti- nal, as well as chronic and heterotopic (in which there is an ectopic as well as an intrauterine gestation) EPs. EP has also rarely been reported after supracervical hysterectomy and even after total abdomi- nal hysterectomy. Histologically, the fallopian tube is comprised of mucosal, muscu- laris, and serosal layers. There is no decidua or decidua basalis as in FIG 33-2 Ectopic pregnancy in the ampullary portion of a fallopian tube. The patient presented with vaginal bleeding and a positive serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). A, Transvaginal longitudinal scan of the ampullary portion of the fallopian tube shows that it is surrounded by free pelvic fluid and contains a gestational sac with a yolk sac (arrow). B, Transverse color Doppler transvaginal sonogram of the hyperechoic tubal ring of the ectopic gestation shows no demonstrable blood flow in the echogenic ring surrounding the gestational sac (arrow). CHAPTER 33 Ectopic Pregnancy assays of hCG based on monoclonal antibodies to the β-subunit of hCG and are highly sensitive and rapid, with virtually no cross- reactions.21 If the urine test is negative, suspicion for EP is lowered, but not erased, because a urine pregnancy test will not detect levels of hCG below 25 mIU/mL. Importantly, a quantitative serum hCG test can detect levels approaching zero. If the serum hCG is negative, then an EP is almost certainly excluded, although chronic EP is still possible and rupture of an EP has been reported after the hCG dropped to zero.22 However, both of these conditions are extremely rare. There has been much discussion in the literature regarding dis- criminatory serum hCG levels above which an IUP should be defini- tively visible by TVS. Levels of 1000 to 2000 mIU/mL (1st International motion, tubal epithelium, and flow of tubal secretions along with the sperm, oocytes, and the conceptus. This all contributes to successful movement of the fertilized ovum through the fallopian tube into the endometrial cavity. This process may become disrupted or altered at many points along the way and result in abnormal implantation.16 Scarring from prior episodes of salpingitis, tubal sterilization, or tubal reconstructive surgery as well as tubal conditions such as salpingitis isthmica nodosa and abnormalities following in utero DES exposure have been postulated to interfere with transport of the conceptus to the endometrial cavity.17 Conditions that predispose to premature implantation are less well understood. Previously it was believed that embryos that implant ectopically were likely to have abnormal karyo- types; however, no good data support this theory. A study of 30 surgi- cally excised EPs found no difference in the karyotypes of the chorionic villi from the EPs compared with a control group of IUPs.18 CLINICAL PRESENTATION Women with EPs most commonly present with symptoms 5 to 8 weeks after the last normal menstrual period. The classic presenting clinical triad of pelvic pain, vaginal bleeding, and an adnexal mass is nonspe- cific and is found in 20% to 40% of patients with EP. Many patients with pain and vaginal bleeding are not pregnant, and such symptoms are commonly due to hemorrhagic or ruptured ovarian cysts, PID, or dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Even with the addition of a positive pregnancy test and amenorrhea, such signs and symptoms can occur in the setting of a normal IUP, miscarriage, or gestational trophoblastic disease. In fact, it is estimated that 70% to 90% of pregnant women who present with pain or vaginal bleeding in the first trimester and who are clinically suspected of harboring an EP turn out to have an IUP. Clinical findings may also include abdominal or adnexal tender- ness. Less common presenting symptoms include referred shoulder pain from irritation of the peritoneal surface under the hemidia- phragm due to free intraperitoneal hemorrhage (Fig. 33-3), cervical motion tenderness, or the urge to defecate secondary to blood collect- ing in the cul-de-sac. Signs of rupture include hemodynamic instabil- ity, orthostatic hypotension, vertigo, loss of consciousness, syncope, or shock from blood loss. EPs in unusual locations may manifest with findings outside the pelvis. However, tubal EPs can be very difficult to diagnose at an early stage. Nearly a third of cases exhibit no clinical signs and 9% have no symptoms prior to rupture, which can occur at any stage without warning.19 Frates and associates20 found that neither sonographic find- ings nor serum hCG levels were useful predictors of tubal rupture. Hence, because of the lack of specificity of clinical presentation and physical findings as well as the absence of known risk factors in up to 50% of patients with EPs, clinicians should have a high index of sus- picion for EP in any woman of reproductive age who presents with pelvic pain, vaginal bleeding, or symptoms suggestive of blood loss such as syncope or vertigo, even if her pregnancy status is not known. Certainly, any sexually active woman with lower abdominal/pelvic pain and vaginal bleeding after missing a menstrual period should be con- sidered to have an EP until proved otherwise. DIAGNOSTIC TESTS Human Chorionic Gonadotropin hCG from the blastocyst is first detectable in maternal serum 6 to 8 days following fertilization. Most current urine pregnancy test kits yield positive results 3 to 4 days after implantation. By 7 days after implantation, which is the time of expected menses, 98% of urine pregnancy tests will be positive. Current pregnancy tests are immuno- FIG 33-3 Small ruptured ectopic pregnancy causing large hemoperito- neum. The patient presented with vaginal bleeding and low serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) of 240 mIU/mL and was hemody- namically unstable. A, Transabdominal midline longitudinal scan dem- onstrating the uterus (small arrows) surrounded by clotted blood (asterisks), which also surrounds a small hyperechoic extrauterine tubal ring of the ectopic gestational sac (large arrow). B, Transvaginal midline sagittal scan of the empty uterus (U) shows clotted blood (asterisks) in the cul-de-sac, within which lies the small echogenic ring of the ectopic pregnancy (arrow), which, at surgery, was found to have ruptured. SECTION II Gynecology spontaneously. Kirk and Bourne34 reported that in 8% to 31% of early pregnancies, the gestation will not be visualized on the initial TVS. The vast majority of PULs are eventually found to be IUPs or failed IUPs, and only approximately 7% to 20% are EPs. However, follow-up is very important. There is no reliable method by which to predict which PULs are IUPs and will either progress normally or miscarry and which PULs are EPs and, of these, which EPs will spontaneously resolve and which are likely to rupture.35 Unfortunately, rupture of EPs has been reported with declining or very low hCG levels, including some rare cases with negative hCG values. It is therefore incorrect to assume that because the hCG level is low, an EP is unlikely or stable or to assume that an EP is too small to visualize and thus not perform a sonogram (see Fig. 33-3).22,36,37 Molecular Biomarkers Studies are ongoing in attempts to identify diagnostic molecular bio- markers that can reliably distinguish EPs from both normal and abnor- mal IUPs at an early stage, when the location of the pregnancy is not yet known. These data would be extremely useful in the early diagnosis of EP, obviating the need for multiple follow-up blood tests, ultra- sound examinations, and clinic visits, while at the same time decreas- ing the risk of EP rupture. One of the main challenges in these investigations is that there is no suitable animal model for tubal EP, so research must be performed directly in women. Biomarkers of tropho- blastic function, corpus luteal function, angiogenesis, endometrial function, inflammation, muscle damage, and impaired tubal transport are currently being investigated. Although a variety of serum, plasma, and urine biomarkers have been evaluated both independently and in combination, most do not have adequate discriminatory capability to be clinically useful.38-40 One controlled study of patients with EPs and viable IUPs with hCG levels lower than 1500 mIU/mL demonstrated that a four-marker test, including progesterone, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), inhibin A, and activin A, could predict EP with 100% accuracy. However, additional investigations that include patients with abnormal IUPs are necessary to further assess the utility and reli- ability of this panel of markers.41 Transvaginal Sonography In a patient suspected of having an EP, quantitative serum hCG levels and TVS are used in conjunction for diagnosis. It is reasonable to proceed with TVS while the quantitative hCG is being measured or independent of hCG level. Justification for performing TVS prior to obtaining the serum hCG results includes reports that up to 50% of ruptured EPs have extremely low hCG levels (<1000 mIU/mL) and that hCG levels do not necessarily correlate with risk of rupture.22,36,37 Although TVS is much more sensitive than transabdominal sonog- raphy, most experts recommend that scanning begin with transab- dominal pelvic ultrasound, albeit without intentional filling of the bladder.42 The aim of this limited transabdominal pelvic scan is to obtain an overview of the pelvis; establish the size, location, and posi- tion of the uterus; locate an ectopic sac in a high location (Fig. 33-4); and assess for free intraperitoneal fluid, including in the Morison pouch, between the liver and right kidney. This is an excellent method for identifying a large hemoperitoneum that may be missed by TVS. In a supine patient, blood may accumulate in the upper quadrants with only a minimal residual amount of fluid seen in the pelvis. Subse- quently, a detailed TVS is performed to provide higher resolution evaluation of the uterus and adnexa. The yield and reliability of TVS depend upon transducer frequency, patient body habitus, uterine position, presence of leiomyomas, and operator expertise. Optimal transducer frequency for TVS is usually between 5 and 10 MHz. Depth is set such that there is visualization of Reference Preparation [IRP]) were previously used as discriminatory levels for expected visualization of an IUP on TVS. However, most researchers and practitioners now agree that no single serum hCG level should be used to differentiate an IUP from an EP. Rather, analysis of serial hCG levels and follow-up TVS are used to reach the correct diagnosis.23-25 That said, if the serum hCG level is above 3000 mIU/mL (1st IRP) and the uterus is empty, a normal IUP is unlikely, although there have been anecdotal reports of delivery of a normal pregnancy following an initial TVS demonstrating an empty endometrial cavity with hCG levels as high as 4336 mIU/mL.26 There are several possible explanations for this shift in discriminatory threshold levels.
