---
title: "Amniotic Fluid Volume in Fetal Health and Disease"
source: "Callen’s Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology (Norton et al.)"
year: 2024
pages: "Ch 20, pp. 724-739"
evidence_level: "2B"
tags: ['condition', 'amniotic-fluid', 'ultrasound', 'oligohydramnios', 'polyhydramnios']
---

CHAPTER 20 Amniotic Fluid Volume in Fetal Health and Disease absorption.12 Based on these studies, it seems the human fetus is able to alter its swallowing to some degree under various conditions; however, it is unlikely that this represents the major regulatory mecha- nism by which the human fetus maintains its AFV. Secretion of fetal lung fluid into the amniotic cavity is well estab- lished. This concept is supported by the fact that phospholipids are present in the amniotic fluid that can be used as tests for fetal lung maturity. These phospholipids are of pulmonary origin and are not present in substantial quantities in the fetal urine. Ligation of the trachea in utero in other animal species results in expansion of the fetal lung seemingly due to the continued production of fetal lung fluid.2 Fetal lung fluid secretion allows for pulmonary expansion serving to promote fetal lung development.1 Near term fetal sheep demonstrate an outflow of lung fluid of 200 to 400 mL/day.13 Approximately half of the secreted lung fluid enters the amniotic fluid, and the remainder is swallowed as it exits the trachea,9 resulting in a net secretion of 100 to 200 mL/day. Secretion flow is likely the result of active transport of chloride ions across the epithelial lining of the developing lungs.2 The fetal glottis serves to prevent backflow of amniotic fluid into the trachea; thus, there appears to be little osmotic exchange between amniotic fluid and fetal plasma in the lung.3 Secretion of lung fluid into the amniotic fluid is likely a main contributor to the AFV, although factors that regulate fetal lung fluid secretion are poorly understood, and the exact amount secreted into the amniotic cavity in the human fetus has not yet been quantified. An excess of approximately 400 mL is present within the amniotic cavity after considering the volume of fetal urine production and secreted lung fluid less the amount removed via fetal swallowing.3 Furthermore, as gestation advances, fetal urine production as well as secreted lung fluid increases. The process by which this excess volume is compensated to maintain AFV balance is referred to as the intra- membranous pathway. Based on studies in the near term ovine fetus, it is estimated that approximately 200 to 500 mL/day of amniotic fluid is absorbed via the intramembranous pathway.14 Studies in other animal species have demonstrated that the AFV returns to a homeostatic state limiting the amount of water transfer between the fetal and maternal circulations under normal conditions.3 Fetal urine production is the primary source of amniotic fluid in the second half of pregnancy. This is supported by the near complete absence of amniotic fluid in the setting of renal agenesis or fetal urinary tract obstruction. Fetal urine first enters the amniotic space at 8 to 11 weeks’ gestation and continually increases throughout gesta- tion.4 Fetal urine production per kilogram of fetal body weight at 25 weeks’ gestation is approximately 110 mL/kg per 24 hours, and it increases to approximately 190 mL/kg per 24 hours at 39 weeks’ gesta- tion.5 Based on sonographic studies of the fetal bladder measured at regular intervals, the human fetal urine output at term is estimated to be 700 to 900 mL/day.2 In order to contribute to the regulation of the AFV, the fetus is able to respond to changes in fluid status by adjusting urine flow.1 Thurlow and Brace6 observed fetal ovine hypoxia to be associated with increased urine flow, as opposed to the often associated chronic fetal hypoxia and low AFV. Similarly, Gagnon and associates7 found the reduction in overall AFV in the setting of chronic severe placental insufficiency in sheep was due to an increase in the intra- membranous absorption of amniotic fluid, not a decrease in fetal urinary production. This finding suggests that human regulation of the AFV is mediated by other mechanisms (e.g., intramembranous absorption) in addition to changes in fetal urine production at times of fetal hypoxia.7 Fetal swallowing plays a key role in maintaining a stable AFV. In humans, the fetus begins to swallow around the same time that fetal urine first enters the amniotic space, at 8 to 11 weeks’ gestational age.2 An estimated 210 to 760 mL/day is swallowed by the near term fetus.8 In the ovine fetus, hypoxia has been shown to suppress fetal swallow- ing,9 whereas decreases in amniotic fluid osmolality and increases in fetal plasma osmolality will increase fetal swallowing.10 In primates, esophageal ligation leads to the development of hydramnios; however, the AFV returns to normal before delivery.11 It is thought the mainte- nance of a constant AFV despite esophageal ligation in the presence of continued urine production is a result of increasing intramembranous FIG 20-1 The major fetal and maternal amniotic structures involved in the formation and reabsorption of amniotic fluid. (From Wallenburg HCS: The amniotic fluid. J Perinatal Med 5:193, 1977.) Amniotic fluid Placental and reflexed membranes Fetal skin Respiratory tract Gastrointestinal tract Urinary tract Umbilical cord Uterine wall SECTION I Obstetrics dimensions of the maximum vertical pocket are multiplied together to obtain a single value, in cm2) was shown to not be a better predictor of AFV than the AFI and is no longer widely used.33 As originally described by Phelan and associates, in order to calculate the AFI, the abdomen is divided into four quadrants in which the umbilicus divides the upper and lower halves and the linea nigra divides the right and left halves (Fig. 20-3).34 With the patient supine, the linear (or even after large volumes of fluid are infused into the amniotic fluid cavity or after esophageal ligation.1 This finding suggests there is a continuous flow of water and solutes from the amniotic fluid into the fetal circulation. The osmotic gradient between the fetal circulation and the amniotic fluid appears to influence the intramembranous movement of water and solutes across the fetal vessels on the surface of the placenta into the fetal circulation. However, in one ovine study, it was demonstrated that only approximately 35% of the intramem- branous movement of fluid depends on the osmotic difference between the amniotic fluid and the fetal circulation.15 Consequently, there must be other nonpassive mechanisms that contribute to this pathway. The maternal fluid status can influence the fluid balance between the fetal circulation and the AFV. At times of maternal dehydration, the intramembranous pathway likely plays a role in correcting the fetal volume status. With maternal dehydration, the maternal serum osmo- lality increases, resulting in water movement from the fetal circulation to the maternal circulation. This results in a fetal dehydration state causing increased fetal osmolality and promoting movement of water from the amniotic fluid back into the fetal circulation in order to restore the fetal intravascular volume, leading to a decrease in the AFV.3 The reverse is also true. As demonstrated by Magann and colleagues, intravenous maternal hydration with 1 L of fluid increased both the actual and sonographically estimated AFV in the human fetus, with an average increase in the actual AFV of 188 mL.16 Similarly, Kilpatrick and coworkers showed that in a patient with a low AFV, maternal hydration with 2 L of water can increase the human fetal amniotic fluid index (AFI) by up to 31%.17 There is little evidence to support the movement of fluid via the transmembranous pathway as a major con- tributor to the overall AFV. Studies in sheep suggest that only 10 mL/ day is absorbed by the uterus in late gestation in the setting of normal osmolality.18 Given the large surface area of the amnion and chorion, it is clear why membrane permeability has been proposed as a regula- tor of the AFV. However, very little is known regarding the permeability and filtration characteristics of the membranes as they relate to amni- otic fluid dynamics. The amount of fluid secreted by the fetal oronasal cavities is small and not considered a main contributor to the AFV. Studies in sheep demonstrate that approximately 25 mL/day is secreted by the fetal oronasal cavities in late gestation.19 Based on information regarding transepidermal water loss in the preterm infant, it is generally believed there is movement of water across the fetal skin before 22 to 25 weeks’ gestation, which contributes to the AFV in the first half of pregnancy. It seems reasonable to assume there may be a relationship between fetal weight and the AFV because a larger fetus would presumably produce more urine output. However, neonatal birth weight has not been shown to be correlated with a either a dye-determined or an ultrasound- estimated AFV.20 In addition, no clinical correlation has been shown between the AFI and estimated human fetal weight21 (Fig. 20-2). DETERMINATION OF AMNIOTIC FLUID VOLUME How does one measure the AFV during pregnancy? The true AFV can be measured by dye-dilution techniques utilizing amniocentesis or can be directly measured at the time of cesarean delivery.22-24 However, these methods are obviously not practical for routine clinical use. Alternatively, the AFV is commonly estimated with the use of ultra- sound techniques. In the literature, four techniques have been described to estimate the AFV: the AFI25-27; the single deepest pocket (SDP), also referred to as the deepest vertical pocket (DVP) or maximal vertical pocket (MVP)28,29; the two-diameter pocket30; and subjective assess- ment.31,32 The two methods most commonly used are the AFI and DVP. The two-diameter pocket measurement (horizontal and vertical FIG 20-2 Summary of the flow of fluids into and out of the amniotic space in late gestation. (From Brace RA: Physiology of amniotic fluid volume regulation. Clin Obstet Gynecol 40:286, 1997.) FIG 20-3 Diagram of the division of the uterus into four equal quad- rants for determination of the amniotic fluid index (AFI). With the patient supine and the ultrasound transducer perpendicular to the table, the vertical depth (measured in centimeters) of the largest amniotic fluid pocket free of umbilical cord in each quadrant is measured. AFI is cal- culated by summing these four measurements. (From Gabbe SG, Niebyl JR, Simpson JL: Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies, 2nd ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1991.) CHAPTER 20 Amniotic Fluid Volume in Fetal Health and Disease curvilinear) transducer is placed along the maternal anterior abdomi- nal wall and held perpendicular to the floor. The maximum vertical pocket of fluid (usually reported in centimeters) is measured in each of the four quadrants, and the AFI (in centimeters) equals the sum of these four measurements.25,34 The DVP is simply the largest single vertical pocket of fluid that is at least 1 cm in width, obtained following the same criteria described here29,31 (Fig. 20-4). Studies have demonstrated that the dye-determined amniotic fluid calculation and direct measurement at the time of cesarean delivery have good concordance (r = 0.99) and either can be used to determine actual AFV.35 It has been shown that both the AFI and the DVP tech- nique can reliably identify normal AFVs. Unfortunately, most studies have demonstrated poor reliability for ultrasound-estimated AFVs to predict actual low or high volumes.22-24,30,36,37 Subjective assessment (visual interpretation without ultrasound measurements) of AFV has been compared with dye-determined or directly measured AFV, and studies have shown no difference in the accuracy of subjective com- pared to objective assessment (visual interpretation with ultrasound measurements) in the correct determination of AFV.38 Likewise, when comparing subjective assessment of AFV in the second and third tri- mesters and objective assessment with dye-determined fluid volumes, neither operator experience nor sonographic technique was found to affect the accuracy of ultrasound estimates of the AFV31 (Figs. 20-5 and 20-6). Traditionally, pockets filled with umbilical cord have not been used in measurement of the AFV. The use of color Doppler ultrasound can help detect umbilical cord, which may be present within an apparent pocket of amniotic fluid. Thus, it has been suggested that color Doppler be applied during evaluation of the AFV to identify segments of umbil- ical cord that may not be appreciated on standard gray-scale ultra- sound images (Fig. 20-7) in order to improve detection of low AFV.39 However, the use of color Doppler in the sonographic estimation of AFV has been shown to result in overdiagnosis of low AFV (oligohy- dramnios).40 In a study by Magann and colleagues, the use of color Doppler inappropriately diagnosed 21% of women with low AFV who actually had normal dye-determined AFVs.41 In addition, color FIG 20-4 Normal amniotic fluid volume assessed by measurement of the largest single pocket of fluid. In this 22-week gestation, the largest vertical pocket of amniotic fluid, devoid of umbilical cord, is 24 mm. FIG 20-5 Longitudinal sonogram in a second trimester gestation with normal amniotic fluid. Subjective evaluation of normal amniotic fluid depends on the relationship between amniotic fluid and the space occupied by the fetus and placenta. FIG 20-6 Sonogram of a fetus with renal agenesis. Virtually no amni- otic fluid is seen. The fetus is “crowded” within the uterus. The only relatively anechoic space is occupied by the umbilical cord (arrow). Doppler did not identify any more pregnancies with true dye- determined low AFVs compared with traditional gray-scale ultrasound imaging.41 POTENTIAL DIFFICULTIES IN AMNIOTIC FLUID VOLUME ESTIMATION USING ULTRASOUND Determining an estimated AFV either objectively or subjectively is generally straightforward. However, a few potential pitfalls are worth mentioning. Maternal positioning, whether supine or at a 45-degree semierect position, does not appear to influence the measurement of SECTION I Obstetrics from 15 to 16 weeks to 41 to 42 weeks. They demonstrated an increase in AFV as pregnancy advanced from the 15th to the 20th week, and then AFV remained relatively constant from the 20th through the 41st week. Their study showed that the AFV peaked at 33 to 34 weeks’ gesta- tion, then gradually decreased until term, decreasing at a greater rate after 41 weeks.53 Brace and Wolf54 in 1989 derived normal values from a compilation of 705 pregnancies from 12 previously published studies53,55-65 with gestational ages ranging from 8 to 43.2 weeks. They reported a peak AFV of 931 mL at 33.8 weeks with a decrease in the AFV thereafter (Fig. 20-11). Using polynomial regression and log transformation of the data, the authors found no statistically signifi- cant change in the AFV from 22 to 39 weeks’ gestation, with an average volume of 777 mL and a range of 630 to 817 mL.54 They showed a decrease in the AFV after 40 weeks by 8% per week.54 Magann and coworkers, in 1997, measured the AFVs of 144 singleton pregnancies between 15 and 40 weeks also using a single dye-dilution technique with analysis performed in the same laboratory; the AFV was found to increase across gestation with a peak at 40 weeks.66 In 2014, Sandlin and associates67 modeled AFVs across gestation in normal singleton pregnancies using the statistical method quantile regression (QR). In their study, 379 women with singleton pregnancies were evaluated and their amniotic volumes were calculated by either dye-dilution tech- nique or direct measurement at the time of cesarean delivery between 16 and 41 weeks’ gestation.67 These authors were then able to derive a normative chart for AFVs across each week of gestation (16-41 weeks) at the 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 95th percentiles (Table 20-1).67 The authors point out in their study that the use of quantile regression enabled them to relax the stringent assumptions of standard regression models and overcome several of those limitations, thereby allowing them to more appropriately estimate values at the extremes of a dis- tribution (e.g., below the 5th and above the 95th percentiles). Because those values are labeled as abnormal, this is where clinical interest and concern lie—the relationship of abnormal amniotic fluid values and their subsequent association with perinatal outcome.67 Given that the actual AFV can only be directly calculated by amnio- centesis with dye-dilution techniques or directly measured at the time of cesarean delivery, in clinical practice, the AFV is estimated by ultra- sound evaluation using the AFI, the DVP, or subjective assessment. An often-cited reference for normal ultrasound-estimated AFV is an article by Moore and Cayle,27 published in 1990, in which the authors attempted to define the normal AFI in pregnancy. They evaluated the the AFV.42 However, as demonstrated by Fok and coworkers,43 fetal positioning can influence the calculation of the AFI, although it does not appear to influence the DVP measurement (Fig. 20-8). Fetal move- ments do not appear to alter the assessment of AFV, nor does the choice of the transducer, whether curvilinear or sector.44 Excessive pressure with the transducer while scanning can nega- tively influence the estimation of AFV. Flack and associates demon- strated that excess pressure on the maternal abdomen resulted in a 21% decrease in calculated AFI measurement.45 It is important to remember that maternal adipose tissue tends to scatter the ultrasound beam, which may result in artificial echoes suggested within pockets of amni- otic fluid. Thus, obese women may appear to have reduced volume of amniotic fluid as a result of these artifactual echoes (Fig. 20-9). It may help to use a lower frequency transducer when assessing the AFV in these patients. Also, measurements of amniotic fluid pockets may be made in varying locations by different examiners; this too can lead to variation in estimates of AFV (Fig. 20-10). NORMAL AMNIOTIC FLUID VOLUME IN SINGLETON PREGNANCIES In order to establish what constitutes an abnormal AFV, methods for assessing normal amniotic fluid for singleton pregnancies must be determined. Based on published studies in the literature, there are mul- tiple accepted definitions of an abnormally low or high AFV.
