---
title: "Antepartum Fetal Surveillance and the Role of Ultrasound"
source: "Callen’s Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology (Norton et al.)"
year: 2024
pages: "Ch 21, pp. 740-752"
evidence_level: "2B"
tags: ['condition', 'fetal-surveillance', 'ultrasound', 'biophysical-profile', 'doppler']
---

CHAPTER 21 Antepartum Fetal Surveillance and the Role of Ultrasound daily. It may, however, be just as useful to encourage the mother to report any change from what she perceives as “normal.” Multiple factors other than deteriorating fetal status can affect maternal perceptions of movement, including gestational age, placen- tal location, medications, maternal activity, position, and obesity.11,12 However, decreased fetal movement has been associated with an increased risk of stillbirth.11 Further evaluation, therefore, is always warranted once decreased maternal perception of fetal movement is reported both to exclude potentially reversible factors that may be responsible and to ensure fetal well-being. There is only one randomized controlled trial evaluating formal fetal movement counting. During this study, over 68,000 low-risk women were enrolled and randomized to regular fetal movement evaluation (intervention group) or routine care (control group). The antepartum death rate was statistically equal in both groups, 2.9/1000 in the intervention group versus 2.7/1000 in the control group.13 Reporting compliance was a major limitation of this study and may have affected the results. Only 46% of women in the intervention group were compliant in reporting decreased fetal movement. In con- trast, a prospective cohort study performed in Norway found that providing written information about fetal activity, including a defini- tion of what constitutes decreased fetal movement, as well as an invita- tion to monitor fetal movements via kick charts, reduced the incidence of stillbirth by almost 50% in women who presented with a complaint of decreased fetal movement (odds ratio [OR] 0.51, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.32-0.81).14 There have been no randomized controlled trials evaluating fetal movement counting in women with high-risk pregnancies. A systematic review published in the Cochrane Database concluded that there is insufficient evidence to recommend routine fetal movement counting to prevent stillbirth.15 NONSTRESS TEST The NST is the most common screening test used in antepartum sur- veillance. A cardiotocograph, or external fetal monitor, is used to simultaneously record the fetal heart rate (FHR) and maternal uterine activity with Doppler ultrasound transducers that are placed on the maternal abdomen. NST interpretation is based on the premise that a healthy, well-oxygenated fetus will demonstrate accelerations of the heart rate with movement. During an NST, the uterus is quiescent (hence the term nonstress) and the FHR is evaluated for a period of up to 20 minutes, although it may be extended for up to 40 minutes to allow for variations in the fetal sleep-wake cycle. The FHR pattern, including baseline heart rate, variability, and the presence or absence of accelerations and decelerations are evaluated in NST interpretation (Figs. 21-1 and 21-2). These parameters reflect a fetus’s ability to adapt effectively to the intrauterine environment and can give the provider information about fetal well-being. The FHR baseline is regulated by the autonomic nervous system. The parasympathetic innervation of the heart is mediated by the vagus nerve and is responsible for a chronotropic effect that slows down the FHR, as well as an oscillatory effect that alters R wave intervals, result- ing in the heart rate variability. The sympathetic nervous system, on the other hand, releases norepinephrine when stimulated, which accel- erates the FHR and improves inotropy, or contractility.16 The FHR baseline is the average number of beats per minute (rounded to 0 or 5) over a 10-minute period. Periods of marked variability (amplitude of the FHR greater than 25 beats per minute above the baseline) should not be used to determine the baseline. Additionally the baseline should be identifiable for at least 2 minutes during the NST, although the 2 minutes may not be contiguous.17 Most clinicians do not use a com- puterized model to determine baseline and instead “eyeball” the Data from Liston R, Sawchuck D, Young D: Fetal health surveillance: antepartum and intrapartum consensus guideline. Society of Obstetrics and Gynaecologists of Canada, British Columbia Perinatal Health Program. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 29:S3-S56, 2007 [published erratum appears in J Obstet Gynaecol Can 29:909, 2007]. TABLE 21-1 Indications for Antepartum Fetal Surveillance Testing Maternal Conditions • Pregestational diabetes mellitus • Hypertension • Systemic lupus erythematosus • Chronic renal disease • Antiphospholipid syndrome • Hyperthyroidism (poorly controlled) • Hemoglobinopathies (sickle cell, sickle cell–hemoglobin C, or sickle cell–thalassemia disease) • Cyanotic heart disease Pregnancy-Related Conditions • Gestational hypertension • Preeclampsia • Decreased fetal movement • Gestational diabetes mellitus (poorly controlled or medically treated) • Oligohydramnios • Fetal growth restriction • Late-term or postterm pregnancy • Isoimmunization • Previous fetal demise (unexplained or recurrent risk) • Monochorionic multiple gestation (with significant growth discrepancy) TABLE 21-2 Risk of Stillbirth Within 1 Week of a Normal Test BPP, biophysical profile; CST, contraction stress test; NST, nonstress test. aFreeman RK, Anderson G, Dorchester W: A prospective multi- institutional study of antepartum fetal heart rate monitoring. II. Contraction stress test versus nonstress test for primary surveillance. Am J Obstet Gynecol 143(7):778-781, 1982. bBoehm FH, Salyer S, Shah DM, Vaughn WK: Improved outcome of twice weekly nonstress testing. Obstet Gynecol 67(4):566-568, 1986. cManning FA, Morrison I, Harman CR, et al: Fetal assessment based on fetal biophysical profile scoring: experience in 19,221 referred high-risk pregnancies. II. An analysis of false-negative fetal deaths. Am J Obstet Gynecol 157(4 Pt 1):880-884, 1987. dMiller DA, Rabello YA, Paul RH: The modified biophysical profile: antepartum testing in the 1990s. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174(3):812- 817, 1996. Antenatal Test Risk of Stillbirth/1000 NST (once a week)a 3.2 NST (twice a week)b 1.9 BPPc 0.8 Modified BPPd 0.8 CSTa 0.4 methodology or parameters for normal amounts of fetal movement.8 Most often, women are advised to do “kick counts” by lying on their side and counting the number of fetal movements. The perception of 10 distinct movements in 2 hours is commonly regarded as reassur- ing.9,10 Once 10 movements have been recognized by the mother, the count may be discontinued. Kick counts can be repeated as often as SECTION I Obstetrics evaluation. Tracings demonstrating minimal variability (amplitude less than 6 beats per minute) or absent variability (amplitude range is undetectable) warrant further investigation, especially when the gesta- tional age is in the mid- to late third trimester. Accelerations are defined as a visually abrupt increase in FHR with onset to peak less than 30 seconds. In a fetus that is 32 weeks’ gestation or greater, the acceleration should peak at least 15 beats per minute above the baseline and persist for at least 15 seconds from baseline to baseline. In a fetus younger than 32 weeks the peak of the acceleration should be at least 10 beats per minute above baseline and persist for at least 10 seconds. Decelerations are classified as late, early, or variable (Fig. 21-4) and differ in their onset, nadir, and recovery in relation to uterine tracing, leading to subjectivity in interpretation. Additionally, the base- line may be indeterminate, meaning the NST cannot be interpreted. The normal baseline FHR ranges from 110 to 160 beats per minute; the baseline is usually in the higher end of the normal range early in gestation and decreases as gestation advances.18 Variability refers to the expected fluctuations in the baseline FHR that are irregular in amplitude and frequency and are quantified as the amplitude of the peak-to-trough in beats per minute.17 Variability can be absent, minimal, moderate, or marked (Fig. 21-3). Moderate vari- ability, in which the amplitude ranges between 6 and 25 beats per minute, is considered reassuring.1 FHR variability is rare before 24 weeks but should be present after 28 weeks. Absence of variability in the third trimester should be considered abnormal until further FIG 21-1 Fetal heart rate (FHR) tracings demonstrating fetal tachycardia with a baseline fetal heart rate (top line) of about 200 beats per minute (bpm). The green line demonstrates maternal pulse; the bottom tracing shows uterine activity (UA). FIG 21-2 Fetal terminal bradycardia, with an initial fetal heart rate (FHR) of about 180 bpm (beats per minute) that decreases to 60 bpm at the end of the tracing. The green line shows maternal pulse; the bottom tracing shows uterine activity (UA). CHAPTER 21 Antepartum Fetal Surveillance and the Role of Ultrasound Ultimately, the NST is interpreted as “reactive” or “nonreactive.” A reactive NST is defined as the presence of at least two accelerations of the FHR 15 beats per minute or greater above the baseline for a minimum of 15 seconds within a 20-minute period of monitoring. A nonreactive NST lacks the appropriate number of accelerations or doesn’t meet criteria for acceleration but does not demonstrate absence of variability or decelerations. In 2008, the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development in conjunction with the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine published recommendations for the terminology and interpretation of FHR trac- ings and described a new three-tiered system. Although the emphasis contractions. Each type of deceleration has a different cause (hypox- emia, head compression, and cord compression, respectively). Correct identification of the type of deceleration can therefore impact FHR interpretation and management. A sinusoidal FHR is relatively rare and is defined as a smooth, sine wave–like undulating pattern in the FHR baseline with a cycle fre- quency of 3 to 5/minute that persists for over 20 minutes (Fig. 21-5). This pattern is highly associated with fetal anemia. It is considered abnormal and requires prompt attention. Given the association with fetal anemia, assessment by measurement of the peak systolic velocity of the fetal middle cerebral artery (MCA) using Doppler velocimetry is warranted in the absence of a known cause (see Chapter 22). FIG 21-3 Fetal heart rate (FHR) tracing (top line) with a heart rate of 110 bpm (beats per minute) and a nearly flat line consistent with minimal variability. Absence of variability is abnormal and requires further evaluation. EFM, electronic FHR monitoring; UA, uterine activity. The green line shows maternal pulse. The bottom tracing shows uterine activity (UA). FIG 21-4 Fetal heart rate (FHR) tracing demonstrating early decelerations, in which the FHR (top line) decreases gradually with a nadir at the same time as the uterine contraction (lower green line). EFM, elec- tronic FHR monitoring; SpO2, oxygen saturation as measured by pulse oximetry; UA, uterine activity. The green line shows maternal pulse. The bottom tracing shows uterine activity (UA). SECTION I Obstetrics to their previously published rate of 6.1/1000.26 Twice weekly testing remains the most common recommendation in most clinical circumstances. Vibroacoustic stimulation may be used to decrease the number of nonreactive NSTs related to the fetal sleep cycle. Using an artificial larynx on or just above the maternal abdomen and delivering short bursts of sound to the fetus over 1 to 5 seconds, fetal movement may be stimulated, potentially shortening the waiting period before an accel- eration is produced without compromising the test’s validity.27-29 A 2014 systematic review found that the use of vibroacoustic stimulation short- ened the mean overall testing time by almost 7 minutes −6.93 minutes, (95% CI 12.09 minutes to −1.76 minutes) and reduced the frequency of nonreactive NSTs by 40% (OR 0.62, 95% CI 0.48-0.81).29 CONTRACTION STRESS TEST A CST evaluates the FHR using cardiotocography during uterine con- tractions, which cause transient decreased oxygenation. Therefore, this test assesses the fetal oxygenation status during periods of “stress.”7 Contractions can occur spontaneously or can be induced via nipple stimulation or intravenous oxytocin administration. The goal of a CST is to identify the fetus at risk for compromise by observing the fetus in the presence of (reversible) stress before permanent damage occurs.30 Once three contractions in a 10-minute period are achieved, the CST is characterized as negative if no late or significant variable in this report is on intrapartum FHR patterns, these definitions may also be extrapolated to the antepartum setting19 (Figs. 21-6 through 21-8 and Table 21-3). Maturation of the fetal nervous system occurs throughout gestation and affects NST interpretation. Between 24 and 28 weeks, up to 50% of NSTs will not be reactive because of immaturity of the fetal nervous system, which limits the utility of the test in the midtrimester.20 This number of nonreactive tests decreases to 15% between the gestational ages of 28 and 32 weeks.21,22 Frequency and amplitude of FHR accelera- tions increase with advancing gestational age, which contributes to the decrease in nonreactive NSTs as gestational age increases.23,24 Despite widespread use of the NST, there are limited data to support its efficacy in the prevention of stillbirth. A Cochrane review reported that performing an NST had no significant effect on the rate of still- birth or any measure of perinatal morbidity.25 However, the trials included in this meta-analysis were conducted in the early 1980s, when testing was first being introduced and may not reflect how these tests are utilized and interpreted today.25 Likewise, the use of sonography as an adjunct to fetal assessment as well as advances in neonatal care have changed since the studies included in the meta-analysis were performed. Traditionally, the NST was performed on a weekly basis. Starting in 1981, Boehm and associates began increasing the frequency of testing to twice a week in women with at-risk pregnancies and found that the rate of stillbirth after a reactive NST decreased to 1.9/1000 compared FIG 21-5 A sinusoidal fetal heart rate tracing (top line), suggestive of fetal anemia (see text). The bottom tracing shows uterine activity (UA). bpm, beats per minute; FHR, fetal heart rate. (From Catanzarite VA, Schrimmer DB, Madia C, Mendoza A: Prenatal sonographic diagnosis of intracranial haemorrhage: report of a case with a sinusoidal fetal heart rate tracing, and review of the literature. Prenat Diagn 15(3):229-235, 1995, used with permission.) FHR 240 bpm FHR 240 bpm UA mmHg kPa UA mmHg 15:50 CHAPTER 21 Antepartum Fetal Surveillance and the Role of Ultrasound FIG 21-6 Category I tracing. See classification in Table 21-3. BPM, beats per minute; FHR, fetal heart rate. (Personal file of Dr. Leo Brancazio, Duke University.) Category I FHR Tracing FHR Baseline = 125 BPM Moderate Variability No Decelerations Several Accelerations FIG 21-7 Category II tracing. See Table 21-3. BPM, beats per minute; FHR, fetal heart rate. (Personal file of Dr. Leo Brancazio, Duke University.) Category II FHR Tracing FHR Baseline = 135 BPM Minimal Variability No Accelerations No Decelerations SECTION I Obstetrics FIG 21-8 Category III tracing. See Table 21-3. BPM, beats per minute; FHR, fetal heart rate. (Personal file of Dr. Leo Brancazio, Duke University.) FHR Baseline = 175 BPM Absent Variability No Accelerations Recurrent Late Decelerations Category III FHR Tracing decelerations are noted. A positive CST is defined by the presence of late decelerations following 50% or more of the contractions and necessitates further evaluation.9 CST results can be additionally catego- rized as equivocal-suspicious (intermittent late decelerations or signifi- cant variable decelerations), equivocal (FHR decelerations that occur in the presence of contractions more frequent than every 2 minutes or lasting longer than 90 seconds), and unsatisfactory (fewer than three contractions in 10 minutes or an uninterpretable tracing).7 Contraindications to CST include conditions that contraindicate contractions and labor and preclude a vaginal delivery or increase the risk of preterm delivery, uterine rupture, or bleeding and include preterm labor, preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM), a history of extensive uterine surgery, classical cesarean delivery, or known placenta previa. A CST may also be used to help determine mode of delivery in situations of potential or suspected fetal compro- mise including PPROM or fetal growth restriction. BIOPHYSICAL PROFILE A BPP integrates ultrasound observations and cardiotocography. A BPP is a noninvasive and relatively quick method of assessing fetal well-being that utilizes multiple components that can be indepen- dently affected by fetal hypoxemia. The BPP score may provide more in-depth information regarding severity or chronicity of the fetal oxygen state. It is composed of four acute biophysical components and one chronic biophysical component. Each of the acute components, which include the NST, fetal breathing, fetal movement, and fetal tone, is controlled by a discrete regulatory center in the central nervous system (CNS). These centers begin functioning at different gestational ages.31 Tone, controlled by a center in the cortex-subcortical area, is the earliest physical activity to appear and can first be observed at about 8 weeks’ gestational age. Next is fetal movement, which is regulated by a center in the cortex nuclei and appears at about 9 weeks’ gestation. Breathing movements can be visualized at about 21 weeks and are controlled by a center in the ventral surface of the fourth ventricle. The last of the acute biophysical activities to appear is FHR reactivity, which isn’t present until the late second trimester or early third trimester and is regulated in the posterior hypothalamus and medulla.32 Fetal breath- ing movements and FHR reactivity, therefore, are more gestational age dependent than tone and movement, both of which should be present early in the first trimester. To perform a BPP, real-time ultrasound is used to observe the fetus over a maximum period of 30 minutes and either 2 points or 0 points are awarded based on the presence or absence of each parameter. A maximum of 10 points can be achieved during the BPP. Points are awarded for fetal movement if two or more discrete body or limb movements are observed within 30 minutes. Fetal tone is defined as one or more episodes of extension with return to flexion in a limb or opening and closing of the hand (Video 21-1). Fetal breathing is defined as an episode of chest wall movements that are sustained for more than 20 seconds (Video 21-2). Points are also awarded for a reac- tive NST and an amniotic fluid index (AFI) of 5 cm or more or a deepest vertical pocket (DVP) of at least 2 cm (Fig. 21-9, Table 21-4). The gradual hypoxia concept is a theory that the biophysical activi- ties that appear first embryologically are the last to disappear with worsening hypoxia; the activities that are the most sensitive to hypoxia are those that develop last.
