---
title: "Preterm Labor - Sonographic Evaluation of the Cervix"
source: "Callen’s Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology (Norton et al.)"
year: 2024
pages: "Ch 18, pp. 673-693"
evidence_level: "2B"
tags: ['condition', 'preterm-labor', 'cervical-length', 'ultrasound', 'screening']
---

SECTION I Obstetrics FIG 18-1 Diagrams and sonogram of the female pelvis demonstrating placement of the ultrasound trans- ducer for translabial imaging of the gravid cervix. Bl, bladder; EO, external os; FH, fetal head; IO, internal os; V, vagina. (Illustration by James A. Cooper, MD, San Diego, CA.) TABLE 18-1 Transabdominal Ultrasound in Detection of Short Cervix Study* GA, Week (Mean) N (TVU CL < 25 mm) Bladder Blind TAU Cutoff (mm) TA Variation (Longer/Shorter) Sensitivity Need TVU (TAU Not Obtainable) Saul et al, 200812 14-34 (22) 191 (14) Postvoid Yes ≤30 Same 100% NA Stone et al, 201013 18-20 Postvoid No NA Shorter NA NA To et al, 200014 22-24 (23) Prevoid NA NA NA NA NA (51%) Hernandez-Andrade et al, 201215 6-39 (24) 220 (20) Prevoid Yes ≤25 ≤30 Longer 43% 57% NA Friedman et al, 201316 18-24 (20.5) 1217 (76) Prevoid Postvoid No ≤36 ≤36 Shorter 96% 96% 60% (6%) NA (17%) *These studies are listed in the references at the end of the chapter. CL, cervical length; GA, gestational age; TAU, transabdominal ultrasound; TVU, transvaginal ultrasound. relatively poor reliability and validity because of the following short­ comings: (1) the bladder often needs to be adequately filled to obtain a good image, resulting in elongation of the cervix and masking of any funneling of the internal os; (2) fetal parts can obscure the cervix, especially after 20 weeks; (3) the distance from the probe to the cervix results in degraded image quality; and (4) obesity and manual pressure interfere with the resulting image.1 Therefore, it is generally suggested that TAU should not be used for assessment of the cervix, even as a screening test, because its sensitivity for prediction of disease (e.g., increased risk for PTB) is unacceptably low (8%)2 in comparison to TVU. All randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that proved benefit with different treatments for a sonographically detected short cervix used TVU: vaginal progesterone,3,4 cerclage,5-9 and pessary.10,11 The sensitiv­ ity of TVU has been shown to be significantly higher than TAU in detecting a short cervix12-16 (Table 18-1). As can be seen from the studies described in Table 18-1, it is still unclear if TAU is better done before or after voiding; only two studies report blind results. The cutoff for TAU-detected CL measurement needs to be high (usually >35 mm) to achieve a sensitivity of more than 90% for a shortened cervix by TVU, in which case most patients screened with TAU would need a subsequent TVU to confirm or rule out a short cervix. In 9% to 51% of attempted TAU, CL was not obtain­ able. Moreover, TVU CL screening has been shown to have superior cost-effectiveness compared to TAU, with TVU associated with slightly better prevention of PTB, resulting in cost savings of millions of dollars.17 All major guidelines that have described CL screening have clearly recommended TVU, including the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM),18 the American College of Obstetricians and Gy­ necologists (ACOG),19 and the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.20 Given the preponderance of the evidence, TAU is less effective than TVU and should not be used for CL screening. Translabial Ultrasound Translabial (also known as transperineal) ultrasound (TLU) was first described in France in the early 1980s. This technique involves having the woman lie on the examination table with her hips and knees flexed. Adjusting the examination table to place her in a Trendelenburg posi­ tion can be helpful. A covered transducer (using a probe cover, or glove, and sterile gel) is positioned in a sagittal orientation on the perineum between the labia majora at the level of the vaginal introitus (Fig. 18-1). Elevation of the woman’s hips with a cushion or by positioning her hands to achieve a pelvic tilt can be used to improve visualization. Unlike TAU, this technique does not require bladder filling, is not impaired by obscuration by fetal parts, and with the transducer closer to the cervix, achieves close to 100% visualization. Other advantages of this technique are that the transducer does not enter the vagina (so no pressure can be exerted on the cervix thus no alteration in appear­ ance from mechanical effect), it does not require an additional CHAPTER 18 Ultrasound Evaluation of the Gravid Cervix recommendations for the performance of TVU of the cervix are shown in Table 18-2.22 The total time for TVU of the cervix is approximately 5 minutes. For optimal results, the following criteria should be sought: the inter­ nal os should be either flat or at an isosceles angle with respect to the uterus, the whole length of the cervix should be visualized, a symmetric image of the external os should be obtained, the distance from the surface of the posterior lip to the cervical canal should be equal to the distance from the surface of the anterior lip to the cervical canal, and there should be no increased echogenicity in the cervix (a sign of exces­ sive pressure).23 Successful completion of the education program, examination, and continuing image review, all provided by the Perinatal Quality Founda­ tion of the SMFM, is available and is recommended.22 Ideally, TVU CL assessment should only be performed after this program has been completed. transducer, it can be performed in the setting of ruptured membranes, and it is well accepted by most women. The main drawback of TLU, however, is that gas in the rectum sometimes impedes visualization of the cervix, especially the external os. TLU is also more difficult to master than TVU and has been reported to be an unsatisfactory alter­ native.21 However, with experience in using TLU, adequate visualiza­ tion of the cervix can often be obtained. Transvaginal Ultrasound The first studies of the human cervix using TVU date back to the late 1980s. A clean transvaginal probe covered by a condom is gently inserted into the vagina (Fig. 18-2A and B). The technique shares the advantages of TLU; however, the probe is close to the cervix, without the problem of obscuring bowel gas. Thus, TVU has become the preferred approach for sonographic evaluation of the gravid cervix in virtually all clinical settings (Fig. 18-3A to C). Current FIG 18-2 A, Diagrams and sonogram of the female pelvis demonstrating placement of the ultrasound transducer for transvaginal imaging of the gravid cervix. EO, external os; FH, fetal head; IO, internal os. B, Two-dimensional ultrasound image of the cervix in its longest axis in the sagittal view. The internal and external os (calipers) and the entire endocervical canal can be clearly seen, and the image is enlarged so that it occupies more than 75% of the screen. (Illustrations by James A. Cooper, MD, San Diego, CA.) SECTION I Obstetrics the cervix. This can be recognized by alterations in appearance includ­ ing asymmetry in thickness of the anterior and posterior walls of the cervical canal and by increased echogenicity of the cervix (Fig. 18-4). Contraction Uterine segment contractions may mimic the appearance of funneling of the internal cervical os. In such cases, there is rounded myometrium around the cervix and a normal cervix distal to the contraction (Fig. 18-5). Underdeveloped Lower Uterine Segment Before 14 weeks, the lower uterine segment is difficult to distinguish from the endocervical canal, because the gestational sac has not reached a sufficient size to completely expand the lower part of the uterus. LIMITATIONS AND PITFALLS Although TVU of the cervix is usually straightforward, an anatomic or technical difficulty is encountered in approximately one fourth of patients.24 Full Bladder A bladder that is not completely empty of urine can exert pressure on and appear to elongate the cervix or might mask funneling or opening of the internal os. Excessive Pressure Excessive pressure by the examiner with the transvaginal transducer can also mask funneling or opening of the internal os and can elongate FIG 18-3 Three methods of imaging the cervix. A, Transabdominal sonogram. The cervix, which is distant from the ultrasound transducer, is poorly seen and appears to measure 1.62 cm in length (calipers). B, Translabial sonogram in the same patient. With this approach, visualization of the cervix is somewhat clearer, but shadowing from air in the rectum (arrows) partially obscures the view, resulting in undermeasure- ment of the cervical length (calipers). C, Transvaginal sonogram. The cervix is well seen and measures 3.43 cm in length (calipers). CHAPTER 18 Ultrasound Evaluation of the Gravid Cervix year in the United States alone.26 It is the leading cause of perinatal morbidity and fatality in the United States and as such may be the most important pathologic condition in obstetrics. In terms of years of life lost, PTB is one of the most important diseases in all of medicine. Technique Well Described. The technique is well described (see Table 18-2). Safe and Acceptable. TVU of the cervix is very safe. There is no inoculation of bacteria with TVU. In a randomized trial comparing the use of TVU or the nonuse of TVU in the presence of premature preterm rupture of membranes (PPROM), there was no increased risk of infection for mother or fetus with TVU of the cervix compared with no TVU of the cervix.28 TVU is also well accepted by pregnant women. Pain and severe discomfort are experienced by fewer than 2% of women undergoing TVU, and more than 99% of women would agree to a similar procedure in the future.32,33 Reliable/Reproducible. The interobserver and intraobserver vari­ ability scores of TVU are both less than 10%.34 This low variability between operators is achieved only after adequate training with super­ vised scans and with strict adherence to proper technique, as described earlier. Recognizable Early Asymptomatic Phase. The changes of the cervix that are associated with preterm or term labor have been dem­ onstrated by TVU. These changes include initial opening of the inter­ nal os, progressive cervical shortening and widening along the endocervical canal from the internal to the external os, and ultimate opening of the external os. The earliest changes at the internal os are almost always asymptomatic and can be detected only by TVU. Accuracy of Prediction: Valid Comparison With Manual Examina- tion of the Cervix. Cervical assessment by manual (digital) examina­ tion was a traditional method for prediction of PTB. Digital and transvaginal ultrasound examinations of CL every 2 weeks from 14 to 30 weeks’ gestation were compared in one study (with examiners blinded to the results of the alternate technique)34 and found to both independently predict PTB, but TVU had a much stronger association with PTB than manual examination of the cervix. The mean sono­ graphic CL of the PTB group was significantly shorter than that of the term delivery group, whereas there was no difference in manual cervi­ cal measurements between the two groups.34 The relative lack of success of the digital examination in predicting PTB is probably due to the fact that it is subjective (interobserver vari­ ability of 52%),35 not accurate for evaluating the internal os (the upper half of the cervix is not measurable by this method),36 and nonspecific (15% to 16% of primiparous women and 17% to 35% of multiparous women who are delivered at term have cervices that are 1 cm to 2 cm dilated by manual examination in the late second trimester).37 Sono­ graphic CL measurements are, on average, 11 mm longer than manual estimations. The majority, about three fourths, of asymptomatic women with funneling of the internal os have a cervix felt to be closed and at least 2 cm long by manual examination.38 These data demon­ strate clear benefits of TVU over manual examination for evaluation of the cervix and prediction of PTB. Measurements Cervical Length. Different cervical parameters have been evaluated as predictors of PTB (Fig. 18-6). CL, as measured from the internal to the external os along the endocervical canal, is the most reproducible and reliable measurement (Figs. 18-2B and 18-7A and B). If the cervi­ cal canal is curved, defined as a deviation of the canal of more than 5 mm, the CL can be preferably measured as the sum of two straight lines that essentially follow the curve (Fig. 18-7C).37 A short CL is usually straight, whereas the presence of a curved cervix generally TABLE 18-2 Recommendations for the Technical Performance of Transvaginal Ultrasound Examination of the Cervix Modified from Perinatal Quality Foundation: Cervix Measurement Criteria. 2015. Available at www.clear.perinatalquality.org/. Measurement is taken on a transvaginal image: • Transvaginal measurements are the gold standard for ultrasound cervix measurements. • The short cervix can be missed on transabdominal scans. The transvaginal image is filled primarily with the cervix, and the field of view is optimized for measurement: • The cervix occupies approximately 75% of the image. • The bladder area is visible. The anterior width of the cervix equals the posterior width: • The anterior cervical thickness is equal to the posterior cervical thickness. • The echogenicity is similar for both anterior and posterior portions. • There is limited concavity created by the transducer. The maternal bladder is empty: • The maternal bladder has a variable effect on the cervical length. The external os is seen: • The external os is a small triangular area at the inferior portion of the transervical canal. • The anterior and posterior portions of the cervix come together at the external os. The endocervical canal is visible throughout: • The endocervical canal is a linear echogenicity created by the interface between the anterior and posterior walls of the cervix. • The canal extends between the internal os and external os. Caliper placement is correct: • Calipers are placed where the anterior and posterior walls of the cervix touch at the internal os and external os. • Calipers do not extend to the outermost edge of the cervical tissue. Cervix mobility is considered: • Insert transvaginal probe to view the cervix, withdraw probe until the image blurs to reduce compression from the transducer, then reapply just enough pressure to create best image. • Apply mild suprapubic or fundal pressure to watch for funneling. Reduce probe pressure while fundal or suprapubic pressure is applied. • Visualize the cervix for 3-5 minutes and watch for shortening or funneling. Therefore, the measurement of the true CL is difficult before 14 weeks. At other times, particularly between 14 and 18 weeks’ gestation, the presence of a contraction can close the lower uterine segment and make the distinction between this structure and the true CL difficult. CLINICAL APPLICATIONS Transvaginal Ultrasound of the Cervix for Prediction of Preterm Birth Screening Test Criteria TVU of the cervix is most often used in obstetrics as a screening test for the prediction of PTB.1 To be clinically beneficial, a screening test must fulfill specific criteria (Table 18-3).3,5-9,17,24-32 Important and Prevalent Condition. First, a good screening test must evaluate for a clinically important and prevalent condition. PTB occurs in 11.5% of births, or approximately 500,000 pregnancies, per SECTION I Obstetrics Careful evaluation of the apparent funneling with TVU over several minutes (at least 5) should resolve any question of the morphologic character of the upper cervical canal. In some instances, the depth of a true funnel may be difficult to quantify, because the funneled portion may merge with the lower uterine segment and the characteristic shoulder that depicts the border between lower uterine segment and the true cervix may be flattened. Funneling has been reported to have higher interobserver variability among examiners and different centers than CL.29 In spite of these difficulties, funneling has been reported to have better or similar predictive accuracy for PTB than CL.29,34,38 In one high-risk population, minimal funneling (<25%) noted between 14 and 22 weeks was not associated with a significant increase in PTB, whereas moderate funneling (25-50%) and severe funneling (>50%) were associated with a 50% or more probability of PTB.34 The fact that less than 25% funneling is not associated with an increased risk of PTB is important, because this is a common finding that should not raise alarm or result in intervention. Funneling has been shown in all signifies a CL of more than 25 mm and, therefore, is a reassuring finding. If the cervical canal is closed, CL is the only parameter that needs to be measured. Funneling. In about 10% of low-risk women29 and 25% to 33% of high-risk women,34,38,39 the internal os is open (Fig. 18-8). In this case, the open portion of cervix (funnel length) and internal os diameter (funnel width) can be measured. The percentage of funneling is calcu­ lated as funnel length divided by total CL. Total CL is equivalent to the sum of funnel length and functional CL. Functional CL in this case is the closed portion of the endocervical canal only. Functional CL is the sonographic CL used for calculations and predictions, and the term CL, if not otherwise specified, refers to the functional CL. If funneling is present, the shape can be recorded. A continuous process of funneling has been described, going from a normal T shape, to Y, then V, and finally a U shape (Figs. 18-9 and 18-10).40 It appears that U-shaped funneling is more likely to be associated with PTB compared with a V-shaped funnel41; however, these distinctions are somewhat subjective. FIG 18-4 A, Ultrasound image of the cervix with excess manual pressure from the transvaginal probe. The anterior lip of the cervix appears significantly thinner than the posterior lip of the cervix (double-headed arrows). Small triangular markers (arrowheads) show increased echogenicity below the posterior lip of the cervix, an indication of excess pressure. B, The anterior and posterior portions of the cervix appear equal in thickness (double-headed arrows). The transvaginal transducer should be inserted just enough to adequately visualize and obtain a reliable measurement of cervical length, without altering anatomy. Vaginal mucosa appears hyperechoic (small short arrows). FIG 18-5 Cervix with lower uterine segment contractions (asterisks). Lower uterine segment contractions should be considered whenever the apparent cervical length (CL) measures more than 50 mm, the cervical canal assumes an S shape, or the lower uterine segments (either anteriorly, posteriorly, or both) appear thickened and asymmetric.
